well hello everybody and
thank you for joining us for the fourth
uh um assembly on uh
harun faraki and david greber's work
and this time we slightly come back to
the original topic that we plan to
discuss
meeting the topic of labor
and labor in relation to violence which
we from the very beginning identified as
a topic uh relevant for the work of both
david and haroon
and uh before we proceed directly to
that new topic or maybe not new but the
uh the old topic uh let us do a small
follow-up on the previous assembly when
when we discussed the concept of war
um in
[Music]
the work of harun and david
and
i
give a word to tom hollard who will
present us the project against special
operation images um
published
by her on her carbon faraki website and
initiated by horne faroq institute
please go ahead
i have to share my want to share my
screen one moment
um
do you see the
yes we can see the image okay okay good
um
and you hear me also yeah yeah
okay
um
yes
thanks for
giving me the opportunity to
uh shortly uh
speak to and uh on behalf of the harvard
ferrari institute and
it's um uh its call or it's uh it's in
its invitation to contribute uh i um
i'm i'm not going to
um
i'm not going to address
any kind of direct relationship but i in
any any direct connection between
uh haroon's work and david's work in
this
short paper
uh but i think i mean around the
question of uh labor
and violence as as you already uh
mentioned
it's there's there's something in
um in the very term operation and upper
on the and the operational which i've
which we might uh
uh discuss in the in the
in the discussion afterwards um
i would like to start right away i've
written a short paper
the roon faraki institute was founded in
to all of you who don't know about
this origin in 2015 in the aftermath of
haroon's past thing in 2014.
in the same year 2015
the visual culture research center an
independent
para academic organization founded in
kiev in 2007
organized the kiev biennial
for the second time i think or third
time
the center had also been an active agent
amid the euromaidan revolution of
2013-14
where it organized among other things
an open university on the maidan square
it was therefore participating in
overthrowing the russia-backed
yanukovich government which in turn led
to putin's aggressions
in eastern ukraine and the annexation of
crimea
the people from visual culture research
center decided to call the biennial the
school of kiev in order to emphasize the
fact that they considered the event to
be an educational project at heart
as vasil cheripanin one of the members
of the center explained at the time
i quote
sorry
um our initial idea was that we need
more knowledge than art
we didn't want to stage a biennial that
acts
like an art market where famous curators
and fashionable artists come and show
themselves we are interested in the
process of studying that's why all
participants are somehow engaged in an
educational way the works of art are not
just there to illustrate the ideas we
are discussing but to provide their own
narrative of the problems we are
tackling
shortly before haroun had died in the
summer of 2014
he had he had agreed to participate in
the kiev biennial scheduled for the
following year
he was to head one of the schools of the
school of kiev project called the school
of image and evidence
as the organizers wrote on the biennials
website
i quote documentary image production
became a defining political factor in
the ukrainian turmoil while russia is
deploying its forces of information war
and propaganda to further further its
military aggression ukraine is
responding with attempts to create a
propaganda machine of its own
documentary evidence is becoming hostage
to opposing and
irreconcilable narratives
at the same time user-generated online
video is profoundly changing the ways
war is documented and perceived
end of quote
when after february 24 we started to
think about how to respond to the
current stage of the russian aggression
we found this critical account of visual
cultures in ukraine and russia in 2015
to be quite revealing and compelling for
one because it could be read to a
certain extent as an exact assessment of
the situation that we and particularly
the ukrainian people experience today
moreover we were of course taken by the
fact that harun faraki was considered by
the key of theorist activists as a key
reference and model for critical
analysis and the refutation of the
abuses of the documentary image by the
various parties in times of war
farrocky and others such as critics and
theorists like serge danae villen
flusser or paul virgilio whom he himself
relied upon as intellectual and
political guides as well as those who
followed him in his suite
have chosen the ideological
instrumentalization and ominous truth
politics of evidentiary visual visual
production as their object of study and
scrutiny
oh sorry i'm somewhat stuck here yeah
in this spirit
the roon farrock institute published an
early march a statement that was also
conceived as an invitation to contribute
to a special issue of our journal rosa
mercedes an invitation we would very
much like to extend in this group as
well
we called it against special operation
images a title that carries obvious
references to putin's political military
lexicon as well as to farrock's concept
of the operational image
by conflating or rather juxtaposing
different meanings and semantic values
of the operational and the image and
placing and against in front of them
we aim at a critical and probably
controversial
reflection on the and of the
productivity of faraki's concept as well
as at the question of how information
and disinformation semantic linguistic
manipulations the entire gamut of
epistemological and psychological gas
lighting that is currently being
deployed to discredit evidentiary truth
and to take the documentary and to take
the documentary image as hostage to once
again quote the announcement of the
school of image and evidence
as you may well know farrocky has always
been a partisan of the documentary image
at the same time he acted as a fierce
outspoken critic of the many visual
practices in film and television that
turned documentary image making into an
ideological tool in the manufacturing of
consent and cliche
in many respects he was looking for ways
beyond documentarism while remaining
committed to those deployments of the
documentary where an image opt when
image objects or revolves against the
representational and political functions
it is supposed to serve
in late 1975 as 75 he wrote the
following about the reliability of the
documentary image as a source of
historical knowledge
a news reel from 1947 tends to document
how a newsreel was cut and spoken at the
time rather than how things looked then
and what the speaker said
unlike in textual work editing the
negative definitely biases the material
toward a particular substantial
representational interest
and further on
what is called documentation shows the
world as if it were known which has the
effect that a few years later we can no
longer experience what it looked like
images must be made with which today's
strange world can be discovered and the
present becomes history
so here we have both first the critical
view of a certain understanding of the
documentary image as a transparent
window into a historical reality to
which farrocky opposes a critique of
representation and the politics of truth
associated with the documentary image
and second a call to work towards the
production of a different kind of image
that would make accessible visually and
cognitively the historic and
effectively emotively the the historic
the the historicity of the contemporary
moment
since the 1980s at the latest by the
time he worked on sa films such as suc
or images of the world in the
inscription of war
faraki became increasingly interested in
the type of photographic and filmic
image that he would later dub
operational image in which he elaborates
in the 2003 lecture phantom image that
you may have read
in preparation
crucial for this interest was the
insight into the interactions and
incompatibilities of human and machine
vision of the biological and the
mechanical eye of perception and
calculation
farrocky was both fascinated and
appalled by what appeared to be a
process of an increasing replacement of
the human by the machine of the sensory
by the algorithmic and capitalist
production and destruction in factories
and on the battlefield leading
ultimately if dystopically to labor or
work without workers and wars without
soldiers
in work such as eye machine he
contemplated the implications of the
deployment and advertisement of the
so-called smart bombs
deployed by the americans in the second
gulf war of 1991 and the extent to which
these weapon systems were designed and
sold on the ground of a notion of
automated computerized vision that is
using operational images that exist
independently in a purely intra-machinic
communication taking place ultimately or
in some views ideally beyond the reach
of human cognition
as tariff as terrifying the substitution
of conventional representational images
by operational images of human vision by
machine vision may seem
for for rocky it also held a critical
promise or potential
two of the early inspiration for
thinking beyond representation and the
subjection of visual visual images to
ideology
he found in sergei tretiakov's
productivist concepts of factor graphic
operative literature and in roland
bard's concept of an opera operative
language
farrocky read treacherkov around 1968
when he conceived the notion of
operative film in the context of a
project of fusing brechtian education
with programmed computerized instruction
in a variant of marxist cybernetics
in a text from that time he wrote in
strictly lowercase case fashion
treacherkov coined the terms to the
terms description information to
distinguish literary genres
the agitational film or any component of
an agitation is operating the informing
film can speak of of anything of its own
speechlessness as well as of a political
theme the operating film can only speak
of what is or becomes part of the
operation
the informing film cannot be judged
authorizatively
we cannot state whether an informing
film about a demonstration benefits the
police or creates new demonstrate new
demonstrators who benefits from an
informative film is decided by the level
of organization of the opponents of
class struggle an operative film about a
demonstration decides for itself it is
part of the operation to organize a
class
an operative film can be judged by the
operation by how it comes about and by
the place of the operation in the class
strategy the theory of the operative
film and the theory of the operation are
intertwined
by pulling away the smokescreen of
pathetic taste and moral judgment
farrocky chose the productivist
agitational stance in the aftermath of
aftermath of 68
as a revolutionary antidote to bourgeois
capitalist deployments of
representational as well as abstract
images without use value and class
struggle any image any artistic
utterance would lose its legitimacy
legitimacy
a few years earlier in 1965 farrocky
wrote a review of the german translation
of brolambard's mythologies from the
late 1950s
he was to return to this text repeatedly
in the following years and decades and
he particularly drew on a passage from
the theoretical part of the book myth
today
in which bard and almost trajectory and
manner called for the abolishment of any
matter language by which he meant the
de-politicized speech of myth among
which he counted photography and film
insisting on the distinction between
object language or language object and
meta language favoring the transitive
language of human labor
i quote from forbad's chapter on the on
the myth today if i'm a woodcutter and
i'm glad to name the tree which i'm
feeling whatever the form of my sentence
i speak the tree i do not speak about it
this i i speak the tree i do not speak
about about it this means that my
language is operational transitively
linked to its objects between the tree
and myself there is nothing but my labor
travail that is to say an action this is
a political language it represents
nature for me only in as much as i'm
going to transform it it is a language
thanks to which i act the object the
tree is not an image for me it is simply
the meaning of my action but if i am not
a woodcutter i can no longer speak the
tree i can only speak about it on it my
language is no longer the instrument of
an acted upon tree it is the tree
celebrated which becomes the instrument
of my language
there is therefore one language which is
not mythical it is the language of a man
of man as a producer wherever man speaks
in order to transform reality and no
longer to preserve it is in it as an
image wherever he links his language to
the making of things meta language is
referred to
referred to a language object and myth
is impossible
this is why revolutionary language
proper cannot be mythical the
bourgeoisie hides the fact that it is
the bourgeoisie and thereby produces
myth revolution announces itself openly
as revolution and thereby and thereby
abolish this myth
the call to abolish myth and therefore
the bourgeois image entails the question
what functions and uses of the visual
image may remain
the post-productivist operative film of
the radical left around 68 was one
option also for ferraki
but what about the notion of the
phenomenon of the operational image a
post or enter human modality of the
image which can also be called to drawn
theorists such as
alexander galloway or jonathan beller
actionable or programmable image
farrocky seemed to have lost any
traction with with the treacherkovian or
bartesian concept of the operative when
he worked on the operational image in
imagine other works of the early 2000s
one might say that he found himself
caught between the critique of mythic
language and image and the critique of
the dehumanizing effects of the
operational images operations
the integration of manual labor the
abstraction of work the pervasive value
extracts extraction of individual and
collective creativity by racial
capitalism the computerization of
production and the monopolist networking
of image and text however didn't leave
much room to fantasize about
revolutionary modes of image and world
making along the lines of operationality
that is along the lines of an image that
works for and by itself
today the operational image of the smart
bomb at the drone robot has been joined
and partly replaced by a wide array of
image and text operations which are
constantly blurring the lines between
old school propaganda visual war
reporting citizen online journalism open
source image forensics and investigative
athletics etc moreover the term
operation has been occupied in the most
insidious manner namely in an attempt to
distract attention away from the fact
that russia has started a full-scale war
on the very day of the invasion of
ukraine by russian military on february
24 vladimir putin called the war that he
was about to start a special military a
special military operation only to
censor and penalize any use of the term
war thereafter
that way he conquered the meaning of the
term operation to exclude any
association not only with war but also
with work with opera
deliberately only only
deliberately one has to suspect putin
used the technical clinical and
therefore rational sounding word to name
his attack supposedly an operation is a
limited act with a precisely defined aim
to be pursued in economical efficient
manner
of course he could rely on a certain
knowledge and understanding of the term
particularly in the west for a long time
special operations featured in the
lexicon of military language it has been
a key instrument of cold war strategies
especially by the united states and by
the united states against the soviet
union according to nato a special
operations are conducted by especially
designated organized selected trained
and equipped forces using unconventional
techniques and modes of employment
strategically strategically special
operations are part of a so-called
indirect approach suggesting that in the
words of a u.s military expert the
ability to operate with a small
footprint and low visibility invest time
and resources to foster inter-agency and
foreign partnerships develop deep
cultural expertise and rapidly adapt
emerging technologies
putin's russia has relied on these
principles of special operations for
some while
particularly in its military engagement
in eastern ukraine since 2014 and the
annexation of crimea of the same year
but also before
for years the western military community
has been studiously inter interpreting
the jerusalem of doctrine and other key
texts as open secrets underlying
russia's hybrid or non-linear warfare
presumably these texts aim at the
dissolution of any differences between
military and non-military actions
between economic sanctions political or
diplomatic maneuvers in warfare and
assume information confrontation
leaving much room for speculation about
the actual military or non-military
character of such operations but also
about the misleading and disinforming
function of these texts and the graphs
and images they entail
for years russia and certainly not
russia alone but russia in particular
has been busy expanding the grey zone of
warfare
constructed by means of ambiguity of
attribution indirect approach and below
the threshold of open conflict in many
respects contemporary warfare is about
creating epistemological insecurity and
instability about shifting the grounds
beneath perception about producing
conflation ambiguity
indistinguishability etc and it is here
in the realm of fascist epistemics and
the active construction of a despotic
unreality as timothy snyder called it
where any decision in the final instance
appears to be left
with the arbitrariness or the
capriciousness embodied in the
autocratic ruler
this said the operational image as the
embodiment of epistemological crisis
that putin like other fascist leaders
before him has turned himself into
seems to call for a special operation to
remove it
however it should have become clear by
now to fight one operational image with
the other would yield no solution
whatsoever and thus we are left with
hierarchies call from 1975
images must be made with which today's
strange world can be discovered and the
present becomes history
thank you
thank you very much tom it was a very um
informative and dense presentation which
um reveals the importance of the
materiality of films and images and how
they participate in the production of
social reality and social relations so i
think it's very very relevant to the
whole conversation and although we have
quite a big program today let us make a
small round of questions if there are
any in the room
i've
been looking for a
photograph i was taught about at school
but i
couldn't find it
it was the image of a
man running
and it appeared like
somebody
about to win a
[Music]
game of
of running sorry for my english
and
when
the photographer
enlarged
enlarged the image
it
it appeared that he wasn't a man
hiring
for his victory in a
game but he was
just being shot
shoot
on the back
and
enlarging the frame
you could see how
there was somebody
aiming at him and
this man was
not winning he was dying
and this photograph was used to teach me
how
uh
what appears to be very concrete very
immediate
like a photo that is not photoshopped it
it was real it was just
uh
the meaning of the image changed when
you enlarged the the frame of it
so it was used to to tell
to say
don't believe
in the concreteness of a documentary
images
and
i have
also an objection about
rolandbacht
i don't believe
it exists such a thing as a
language that is not mythical
what's
peculiar of human beings
is
imagination and imagination means
that we
imagine uh
stuff before before doing it
before uh
failing the tree
the
the man
thinks
about about
images
how
shall the
fallen tree
bee where shall it fall
actually my husband
fell a tree and
it is very important to be careful of
what happens after you you've cut the
tree because it can fall on your house
or on yourself
and you have to
plan
when you
fall a tree you have to
take agreements with
the people that help you in
in failing it and so on and so forth
and there is a lot of imagination of it
in it
and there is a lot of imagination in a
revolution too
and
uh
a collective imagination uh
which is about uh
which is exactly about smith's
in
in fragments of an anarchist
anthropology
david
said something very interesting about
the uh
imaginary word of
malagasy
that
malagasy had
had a very egalitarian society
and
a very uh
belligerent imagination
there's plenty of plots of
sorceries of
people
mages wanting to take the power on on
people in their imaginary world
and
this is
or can be an imaginary
border against
the possibility that people take power
over others
so uh
i think uh
the only way to
get rid of
manipulation of
imagination is to be aware that
human beings
are
people who imagine and
to be aware of how our collective
imagination works
and uh
the distinction between uh
real and imaginary is uh
slippery
when we
talk of human beings
yeah
i could i could i could could respond to
it but i wouldn't uh
wouldn't like to jump in in defense of
um of uh of olambard in the 1950s when
he was
uh
trying to trying to establish himself as
a cert as a thinker
uh
uh on the left uh
in in
in um
in
being dissident of the left at the same
time i mean he was he was he was what he
was actually trying in the end and this
quote is from from a sub chapter section
of this kind of theoretical part of uh
mythologies where he's speaking
um uh on the on the myth of the left
and uh and he's and he's particularly
addressing the ways in which uh um the
left has has been producing its own
myths uh
uh
its own myth of revolution and its own
myth also of uh
uh
uh of of class and uh and class
romanticism etc and uh so this uh i
think for him it was it was an attempt
to in a way um
uh distance himself from certain kind of
certain myth certain mythologies which
he uh which he
blamed to be
uh enough and an obstacle to the
development of the left in in france at
the time and this of course is a very
highly and
highly informed by brecht at the time
and uh
and and very much
and very much placed against a certain
kind of leftist leaning of uh of of of a
post-war bourgeoisie which he which he
wasn't particularly fond of
but but as but as you know probably know
about uh kind of developed into a
different thinker as
as uh i mean in in the 1970s he would
have
he would have agreed much more with your
uh with your argument and uh i guess and
it's
so it so it is a really
uh uh it's a snapshot in a way an
historical snapshot of of a thinker
kind of carving carving uh it's carving
his place in intellectual history at a
certain time as a as the leftist
structuralist marxist structuralist uh
which uh a position which he will
maintain for a couple of years and then
leaving again
and uh but what uh what what what for
what what tyrone found i guess i mean
interesting about this this position was
uh the
um yeah the the i mean the the i mean
the possibility to get rid of certain
kind of myths and certain cliches uh of
film theory film criticism film
athletics in general uh and our
aesthetics of the image and um and um
and
this was of course
a kind of a project of
of purification and of uh and of uh
yeah and a very benjaminian um attempt
at uh
at uh getting rid of the aesthetics of
uh or the ethicization of politics um uh
on the left as well in in in the late
1960s and it's so it's uh i think it's
uh
they they
both bart and farrocky at the time need
to be taken with uh with the historical
background in mind
[Music]
yeah thank you thank you very much for
this answer and i think we had another
question from avi avi would you like to
say something because you you then load
your hand but so i don't know if it was
by chance or not
thanks i just had a very short comment
but it might be redundant now that uh
sorry i don't know how to pronounce and
here
comment i'm just gonna say to simone
[Music]
using the metaphor from that photo i
just made the assumption
reading also the paper that we were
given about graver that maybe he just
meant
idealist abstraction when he said the
word mythology
rather than how we might use mythology
thank you and we have one more question
in the chat uh uh from andres dear tom
thanks it was a fantastic presentation
how would you locate haroon's and andre
which has film uh videograms of a
revolution in respect to the idea of the
operational image
it's possible that they pronounce the
name wrongly but so sorry about that
no no that's that was uh
yes
that's
i
i i don't i don't know whether this is i
mean it whether whether this this
particular film um
is uh
uh would be a
would be a good example or would would
be a good case of uh of studying and uh
ex and exemplifying uh the operational
in image making of course i mean the
very i mean the very material that uh
that varaki and
were kind of
were collecting and then uh editing um
was had had had an opera hadn't had
operational um
functions for for both sides for the for
the uh for the chargescale regime for
the uh secret police and and for those
who entered the film um the the
television studios and and and
turned uh
turned the turn the tools and
instruments of uh
of uh of governmental uh visual
production of power of the of
the
of the visual production of the ruling
powers into into their
uh operative uh
uh
yeah toolbox and uh so this i i think
yes i mean to a large extent on the
other hand as and and uh i would say
that this this is i mean these images
are
uh which they kind of uh
which they um
uh edited into this narration are
are in a way uh
kind of highly illustrative of the way
images can
are becoming and image making is
becoming operative in a in a
revolutionary moment so it's so it's
it's it's in fact a good example i'm i
have to have to correct myself here
i think
thank you and so if we don't have
further questions because we also the
time is running so let's just proceed to
the next presentation if you are if you
agree with this
and uh um so max york hindera
from karl
will presenters the film the silver and
the cross and i hope that you had a
chance to
watch it in advance
uh thank you
thank you uh sinaida thank you
auntie um for for the invitation thank
you for for having me
it's a pleasure tom to see you after
such a long time
and and great to to meet all of you here
so i
i
wanted to
to contribute just a tiny bit certainly
not as elaborate as tom's input
and wanted to speak about the film of
haroon's film uh the silver and the
cross
uh i really do hope you had a chance to
see it
um it's uh it's a film that was
commissioned for an exhibition that i
was
fortunate to to be part of the
curatorial team
uh it was an exhibition called uh the
potency principle
and um
could you all just give me a slight
feedback so i get like a chance to
understand you raise your hand who had
the chance to see the film or so so i
know what i'm dealing with okay so it's
it's uh around half
at least so that's good um thank you for
that um so uh this uh this uh film which
is a split screen
um
[Music]
uh film that was uh made between 2008
and presented in 2010 for this
exhibition the potency principle
which was shown in museum reina sofia in
madrid and then at house the culture
developed in berlin and at the end of
museo nacional de arte national museum
of art in la paz bolivia
this film was an i think uh
exemplary exercise in analysis of uh
you know the the visible and the
invisible uh when we speak about uh the
analysis
of images and it relates to
the silver city the legendary silver
city of potussie which
is also the the beginning of uh of the
whole project of the potency principle
i'm going to fill you in about
some issues concerning um
concerning the the exhibition and then
just make make a brief comment
uh and be happy to have any sort of
feedback of your thoughts about the film
um
well
i'd like to can i share the
screen i just have very few images
okay
i'll try to
okay i think you can yeah it works you
can see it great
so uh the the potassium principal
exhibition
uh
in its original spanish title is called
principio potosi and uh principio the
word principio
can have two meanings in spanish
first it can mean the beginning
principle as a beginning and principio
second as a principle as a set of rules
and we chose together with my colleagues
uh alice kaiser and andreas siegmann
with whom we
curated this exhibition and had
three years to work together with a
quite a lot of artists
one of them haroon who had actually also
the chance to travel to bolivia today's
bolivia and visit but to see and film
there and work there
we
we dedicated this exhibition to
both of the meanings and the
relationship they have uh because the
the silver city of the legendary silver
city of puerto c at the end of the 16th
century at the beginning of the 17th
century was
the economic
uh
backbone or provided the economic
backbone for uh
those days largest colonial empire on
the globe which was uh the spanish
colonial empire which extended from
this iberian peninsula to
all of the american
uh uh
continent and also to the to the
philippines and some parts of europe
such as the netherlands and what we
today know as uh austria or hungary et
cetera um so
this largest colonial empire was
basically
sustained by the silver extraction of uh
the famous legendary silver mountain
which is the one you can see
um here on this uh which is part of the
image right and in harun's film at the
split screen you have on one hand
the
uh
image that he's analyzing which is a 17
and 18th century uh painting of the
silver city and how it functions which
we could see
the image above on this film poster
which is also designed by andrea
siegmann
and then in harun says split green you
would have you know contemporary imagery
filmed input in potussie and
compared
to the
to the painting
so
uh the exhibition then dealt with the
relation between the beginning and the
principle and perhaps some of you know
the the
book famous book 1973 publication by
eduardo galeano called the open veins of
latin america which is a book which is
dedicated to the
exemplary cases
uh or to
take in
certain
[Music]
modes of extraction
analyze the motives of parandi of
colonial neocolonial extractivism from
the 16th century to the 20th century and
uh he describes this uh with the
production of such things as silver gold
uh cow choke sugar
to name only a few that are relevant
in this book and the first chapter of
this book which describes you know in a
paradigmatic way
how uh extractionism extractivism
works and and the case of of the latin
american continent and its different
colonial
invasions
but to see is the first chapter so it's
the most uh examplary and paradigmatic
case which also historically is the
first
so
the potosi principle principio potosi
was at the same time
the beginning of something like put to
see as a beginning at the same time but
to see as this
example is this principle of uh
of a mode of production and of
extraction at the same time you know
when there is a uh
we describe this principle of how
it is produced we also describe a new
era in global history in which
uh the world is is ruled or structured
by a logic of accumulation
based on the maximum
possible exploitation of
natural and human resources
as is the case with potosi
so
we found
we found and this was the the cause for
this exhibition that at the same time
that this
new era in in global history that we can
call of uh
the modern capitalist colonialism
um
at the beginning of that era there was
also another thing happening um that was
crucial to the first one that maintained
an intrinsic relationship uh to the
logic of accumulation
um that set in
in that 16th century and that would be
the formalization of the production
of images by the counter reformation
church so it is uh
not at all just a mere coincidence
that at the same year which is 1545 when
the silver veins in in the silver
mountain of potussie were
discovered by the spanish and uh and the
um
colony that later became the city of
puerto c were founded the same year 1545
was the year in which the
famous council of trent which is a
famous council
of trento of
of the counter-reformation church took
place in which
painting or art but namely painting were
uh defined as the
ideal most important ideological weapon
and formalized as the most important
ideological weapon of the counter
reformation
catholic roman catholic church
so there's a historical coincidence
between
the discovery of the silver and
the setting in of this principle of
a logic of accumulation based on the
maximum possible exploitation of natural
human resources and the formalization
of
an image production that would lead us
to
[Music]
and
christian indoctrination but also to
the worshipping
of beauty through a defined canon by the
church authorities
so we would state that at this very
beginning
at the beginning of modernity there is
not only the the beginning of a logic of
image production and a global
distribution of images but also uh the
beginning of this logic of accumulation
based on the maximum possible
exploitation of natural and human
resources
um
so having said this uh what we try to do
is to to present images in the
exhibition which are from the andean
region um from 16th century 17th and
18th century
and these images around 20
works from from that epoch
uh would you know some of them be of uh
astonishing
beauty
and uh at the same time um
these images would uh
this was
what we tried to
uh to show would prove would be proof of
some sort of regime that had set in that
was a genocidal uh extractivist
regime which gave birth to that logic of
a global process so harun at the end of
of the film
tells us
i'm just going to read the
the german phrase he says in the
original then translate it into english
which means
at the beginning there was simple theft
today
there is science
global trade and capital instead of the
simple set
and
[Music]
what what uh hahoon introduces us
into is
a
meticulous analysis
of
this image that we see
in front of us which
shields much more
i think information about what was going
on and put to see in that period than a
simple spectator
would see
so our idea of presenting our creatorial
idea of presenting these images with the
contemporary responses of contemporary
artists such as harun
to these paintings
and
to question this intrinsic relationship
of the worship of beauty and the
logic of accumulation
based on a maximum exploitation of
resources as we said
we were hoping that an analysis
of uh minds like that of haroun and then
i like that of her own could uh give us
um could reveal to us some some secrets
about this intrinsic relationship
of uh beauty and accumulation
and the birth of capital and the birth
of art if you like uh the same way in a
modern sense
so haron at the end of of his
of his uh uh movie of of this film
explains to us that at the beginning
there was simple theft but at the end
um when we go through
the history of puerto c
within this film we understand that
there was a whole global system there
was a whole new
era in development of science in order
to exploit the silver there was um a
whole
development
of global trade infrastructure in order
to distribute and redistribute
around the globe the ore exploited in
puerto c and that there was also
um
[Music]
uh well the the production of of these
images
um so at the end of of uh
of of the film which explains the
principle that we've described
uh harun reminds us that
today in archaeology the newest
technologies make it possible to find
out whether some person some remains
of a person
analyzed can tell us
whether this person had a healthy
elementation or a nutritious elimination
and perhaps in the words of harun
we would need such new approaches for
the analysis
of images
and what i think is crucial about
what tyrone
tells us in this film and i'm going to
show you some
other
examples of
how haroon traces
the reality depicted in the
in the painting with the
film images from from our present
and the remains of the present and we
can see
different people in different scales in
in the painting like you see small
figures here right
these kind of new approaches
may have to do
[Music]
with uh
analyzing
the relation between the things we see
and the things we don't see
and uh haroun explains to us that in in
the painting
that we're seeing of of the city of
puerto zi which describes the whole
machinery of production
there are certain things we don't see
and those have to do with the labor
while we do see a lot of technological
infrastructure with very meticulous
um
representations in the painting and how
one shows them in great detail in his
film
i'll go back to some of these
um
what we don't see
is uh
representations detailed representations
of the body of the workers of the mining
workers while we do see representations
of the clothes to to very
tiny details
of uh the bourgeoisie or even of the
artisans and uh domestic servants but we
don't see it about uh let's say
the mining workers
so the fact that we do see details of um
of the bourgeoisie and we don't see
details of the mining workers could uh
mean something so um
in harun's word
uh one day we might find out something
uh we would be able to find out
something about um
the people we're not seeing in detail
through the details we get
of uh those who have something to show
like uh clothes
and so on that are depicted in
in this painting and what i would like
to say uh to conclude
is that uh one
particular aspect became clear in this
exhibition and i think haroun's uh works
very exemplary to it and has uh
taught me myself as a person a great
deal
uh something that i i carry
uh with me and um
uh hold very dear
uh up to today
um that is
the fact that uh the colonial paintings
there are
of such an they may be of such an
astonishing beauty
as they are at the same time
uh
uh proves
of um
the cruelty of uh the regime they were
embedded in and they were produced by
so there's a there's a relation in
dimension of what we can consider the
the
the beauty
um and
and uh the un
incommensurable
cruelty of of the system that produced
uh this beauty
and uh
when when we're thinking about uh
let's say claims this is what i learned
when after
a few years after this exhibition took
place in bolivia at the national museum
of art i became myself director of the
national museum of art in la paz in
bolivia
and
we were trying to follow an effort
by a revolutionary change that had sit
set in bolivia with the year
2009 that was a new constitution of the
state that made bolivia not a republic
but a pluri national state
and this moment of revolutionary change
the the
in this context the national museum of
art
tried to
we tried to
strip
these
the reading of these images from from
its colonial implications
others would say we try to decolonize
right the reading and the collections
um i'm critical about the word of
decolonization
in some
contexts but however
the the one thing
we could learn about decolonizing
the collection which is a collection
of these baroque images
is to understand um
that
getting rid of the images would not be
um
a successful process of of
decolonization but that we have to learn
that in a in in a process of trying to
analyze
what happened in the colony what were
divisions of labor and how violence
structured these divisions of labor and
thus
uh violent
violence was
the only thing that structured a global
economy and still does
if we wanted
to understand that
through an art museum we would have to
ask
these paintings to give us information
and not to deny
neither their beauty nor their content
being colonialist
so we understand i think harun did this
and this is what i mean when i say i
hold it very dearly harun showed us that
we have to learn
from these paintings and we have to
understand that they are our allies at
the hour of wanting to make a change in
the analysis so if there is technologies
in archaeology that make it possible to
find out whether some person has
had a healthy or nutritious limitation
and as saroon says we might need
these kind of technologies for our
analysis of image production
and then we might under understand
the the scaring
[Music]
beauty
of
of colonial imagery
produced by by this new principle of
accumulation we call capitalism
this beauty is at the same time
testimony
uh
in uh the judgment trial
to colonialism
where we will
uh seek for for justice
so we need to understand uh these images
as our allies in order
to go through this process
uh so thank you for for your attention
thank you very much max for for this
very very um interesting and insightful
presentation
and perhaps uh i'll also try to do
immediately to build a couple of bridges
between uh your presentation the
previous presentation and debit stacks
so that we then can then have a
collective discussion uh without doing a
proper separate presentation on david
so first of all i really like this a um
problematization of visible and
invisible in the in the pictures uh
revealed by harun
uh because it's also i think somehow
very much with the idea of
subjects
in private public spaces in david's text
so just to remind you the main argument
that david makes in his uh um article
mozam production
uh from 2006 is actually the argument
which he later on uh develops in his
further
writings and books
and so his main argument is that the
production the the concept of modes of
production has been long understood uh
with a specific focus on material
production
uh which ignores fundamentally important
uh idea that the
material production is always
intertwined with the production of
subjects and we cannot say uh
what comes first because the uh
this this is a mutually constructive and
constitutive
constitutive process where the
production of materialities always shape
and reshape the production of humans in
the production of
social relations then transform the
material the material world
and uh
this work uh he say especially um
the work that really shapes the
production of subjects happens inside
the so-called domestic spaces being
those spaces that remain invisible um
from the outside world so these are
these are
contexts that happen behind the closed
door um
they are not played out on in the public
arena public spaces and therefore this
work which is uh sometimes uh
a work of care and sometimes the work of
violence uh remains largely invisible
while uh the visible game around uh the
production of
subjects happens in the public spaces
and in relation to the production for or
to the mobilization of statuses and
performances and so on and so forth
and in turn while um
listening to your presentation max i was
thinking about the first presentation by
tom and the idea of um
let's say the
what is um
what is manipulative and what is true
about the images and i wonder whether in
this respect there is a an important
difference between let's say the
images on
of the colonial time
and the documentary images of the later
time
because in a way both are taken by
archaeologists or historians or
contemporary historians as documents of
the time that represents some kind of
reality but we understand that the
reality is
bigger than what we can see on the
futures that not only
pictures
can be manipulated especially today with
the mean of different kind of
technologies but the choice of figures
to be represented is um
itself
a technique of making something visible
in something
invisible or leaving something invisible
from the from the eye of the beholder
then um
yeah another another moment uh which i
already mentioned but i can just maybe
emphasize this again is this relation
between the production of spaces and the
production of subjects
in the production of let's say
materialities not only spaces but cities
are part of those materialities
and they also what i was thinking about
is the duration
uh because for example what you also
was talking about is this beauty of the
colonial heritage sometimes and this
beauty which is today um
conceptualized sometimes as a treasury
or as a heritage
these are things that last in time and
that remain and constitute
this material richness
while at the same time we know that this
continuity and this legacy is only
possible because of the invisible
violence which
was structured
based
on regime or imperial regime
or
capitalist regime uh and paradoxically
this duration and this uh longitude
[Music]
this long period of existence let's say
legitimized uh
the violence which was at the origin of
it
and not only it makes it invisible it
also somehow serves as a as an
explanation and justification of what
happened because it creates its logic
and uh
just like the history of federalism
tends to be naturalized as if capitalism
was always the only normal economic
logic similarly we can think of these
colonial or imperial orders as totally
logical natural and therefore
hard to question
and i have
stopped now and will let's collect other
reflections and questions and comments
perhaps i'll just have
a comment yeah about i really like the
presentation also how max ended with
this
idea of images as alice in the process
of decolonization
and it recalls very
strongly these images that
you can't recall the chapter but i'm
sure somebody of the
deep readers of um mcgregor will
remember um
when he talks about the chronicles from
latin america and how they're always
praised because of the pros or because
of the style or because but never about
the content you know so that's a real
strong case about
um
how much the these texts are actually
alice of
graver and wengrow you know when they
when they read them with a completely
different
idea which is not so much about you know
how
the lyric or the or the
prose but just the content of what they
describe which is sometimes forgotten
so just
this
parallel that i thought would be
interesting to remark in the context of
max's
final remark
yeah thank you
is it an elegant if i ask
to say something
sure
just because you you
see naida you you were
uh mentioning
uh the endurance of of beauty through
history or so um
and the naturalization of
of capitalism i think you know if if we
try to analyze
the the constructedness of capitalism
instead of its naturalization then we
also must
uh this is what
you know
this principle uh teaches us we also
must analyze the the constructiveness of
beauty of course right beauty was not
always
the same beauty we consider
today but
uh um
obviously there's no no such a thing as
essence it's it's a historical construct
an essence of beauty it's not uh i would
say it's not a it's neither god given a
nor a gift
but it's uh it's a condition right
beauty like to be able to appreciate
beauty as a condition
and it's a historical condition so we
just wanted to to bring to mind that uh
uh the the big
political struggles in history have
always also been
at the same time they have been
struggles for
the dominance of
narratives right so all political
struggles are also uh struggles for
narratives and uh these narratives
include um
a
beauty or a judgment of
of beauty
so um we we need to keep keep that in
mind i think
uh if
when we speak uh
about beauty that we're always speaking
from a very uh specific historical
moment and we cannot um
assume that uh anything has always been
considered to be what it is considered
today
yeah
sure i think what what i meant is also
this is a cognitive effect uh for
example i mean if if we go to the
contemporary museum
um of any uh
former empire
so we can see uh you know different
objects
referring to different ideas about of
beauty but this whole collection still
is a performance of uh let's say this
post-imperial heritage and
it it doesn't matter whether the
spectator immediately recognizes the
value or not the very fact that it's in
this museum means that it has this value
so we're kind of we're taught to
uh to believe what is beautiful even
though we probably live in a different
era where the conceptions of beauty have
changed but yeah i totally agree with
your comments
do we have any further reactions
questions comments
you go ahead
so
i'll be short this time
i'm
amazed of how the three
speeches
are
how they are so strongly related to each
one
each
of your speech
enlightens the other and it's wonderful
very interesting and uh uh
your idea of uh
what you said united about the uh
what is visible and what is not visible
in
production and in history
is
gives
sense to what uh
max and auntie said before and it's
really fascinating that's
all i had to say
thank you
uh i was just having a thought when i
was reading this paper and i think it
relates
to all three
pieces
um
oh yeah i don't know if anyone else gets
the sense when they're doing
some form of social science or
anthropology
and i was really sort of getting that
sense in the first six pages and
um i'm wondering how it relates to the
other two films which is
people tend to spend a lot of their time
trying to make sense of uh
like contradictory absurd things that
powerful people do
so
perhaps that inherently creates these
weird simplified abstract taxonomies
because
they're essentially absurd
structures or capitalisms or whatever
and obviously now there's got to be a
job to do with that critique and
whatever
but it is nice when there's
attention to things that
are otherwise
um
i don't know sometimes i feel
like the argument
outlined here at least in the greater
paper apologies that's the main one i'm
drawing on and i wasn't so familiar with
the other two
but
it tends to be this sense that a lot of
attention gets
but
exactly as he described later around
trying to make sense of
of you know like what's the example
before
you know like a wife trying to make
sense of some husband's absurd
idea or some employee trying to make
sense of some absurd boss
or me trying to make sense of what's a
weird thing that my manager tells me
or some academic who just makes up a
concept and then we have to write a
grant about it
[Music]
i get a sense that hot social science is
trying to make sense of some weird power
phenomenon
um
whilst forgetting to also
talk about
cool that's happening
[Music]
which might actually make more sense and
might
not uh
fit into such
simplified modes of production problems
anyway i don't know it's just a sense
that i was getting i was reading
did i don't know if that made sense
nica
yeah i think that's make a lot of sense
because it's putting back to what we are
doing all these conversations
the same power dynamics that is going on
in the other part
of the world
yeah
exactly that's from the uh
from the people uh from the lecture
where david wrote about his mom
uh dying and how he wasn't
bureaucracy and stupidity
exactly what you quote
quoted
also want to say that when i propose
this theme about slavery and
labor and war i was
first thinking about
what constitutes a slave
and
this obstruction of human being who is
deprived of
uh his or her social ties
and become this kind of invisible option
by itself
but yeah that's
that's interesting that it went another
direction they done
maybe also just to um
to summarize this idea about the mode of
production again so
uh one of one of david's point is that
uh violence is one of the most
used
modes of production let's say so this is
the machine which uh
the machinery of free uh
subject creation for example if we think
of colonialism so colonialism is a
machine of production but this is a
machine of production which creates new
types of subjects
for example these invisible workers or
similarly uh we can think of uh
the war they also with the machinery
productions of uh subjects whose
profession become to kill to kill other
peoples um and let's say this uh
mechanical process or this this
imagination of uh machinery and
productivism which is inscribed and
embedded in this whole process operates
as a way to normalize what is happening
because it it kind of makes it
uh technological
and uh
modern and
bureaucracy is another type of this
machinery of violence producing
particular subjects
particularly disciplined
yeah something in the chat
max writes violence is predictable uh
could you perhaps
explain a little bit more what you mean
[Music]
i don't know i think i read it in a
david graber thing but it's you you kind
of
you know what it's going to happen it's
a predictable action
you sort of you repeat it
yeah you can control it you know when
you're trying to open and find new ways
i think it's um far harder to control to
create the mode of production in that
way
but one thing i wanted to say about um
the haroon farooqi film
there's the moment they talks about the
mineworkers
and some of the mine workers are forced
into slavery but some are cho like
choose to there are free workers am i
right in saying that
and i just find this
i don't know very bizarre that people
were choosing to go into these mines
i don't know i find that some people
enjoyed the experience maybe of putting
themselves in this bizarre world that we
have no
i don't know yeah we don't know
i can just
clear that doubt
the uh
the free labor market was constituted by
people who
would not uh want to take
the journey back to the to their home
communities
uh you know into account which was
dangerous travels and sometimes many
months of footwork and so on um so they
would um prefer to to stay where they
were but but what is interesting about
forced labor
and
of
free labor or wage labor is exactly that
relation which started input to c that
you know a forced labor transforms into
a wage labor market
and
both relate to each other and create
you know what uh capitalism calls a
prosper uh competition
which is still based on uh forced
deportation of people from their home
communities to a production site
thank you for cleaning that
then i think it's also a very important
comment to emphasize that actually what
is called free labor is a is basically a
choice between dying by walking home
or at least having a great probability
of dying while walking home or
trying to survive here at place but
while taking other risks
but so let's say it's not a choice
between a
an interesting opportunity and another
interesting opportunity it's a choice
between two chances to die in different
ways
any other comments
because normally we actually we aim to
we aim to um
to have an assembly during an hour
now we are by one hour and almost in the
half but the discussion is uh i mean as
long as we have a discussion we can keep
going yeah avi
yeah so i just got lots of rambly
thoughts one was uh
to do with the end of that paper um
around leisure
um when it's talking about domestic
and work time
and then it talks about a transformation
in relation to that
and just a piece of my own work about
um
leisure being the
being the way of buying off people
giving them leisure time from their work
i i haven't really worked out but there
doesn't seem to be i wonder how leisure
time fix fits into
what greg was talking about that and
maybe someone can explain it to me
because i haven't thought it through
um
i also just had an example that came to
my mind
about what i was mentioning before which
i think maybe relates to
the operational image
which i don't know
oh i live in the uk
but in the uk during the first lockdown
everyone tuned in
every evening to
watch and listen to the prime minister
say some stuff
and then everyone will be trying to make
sense of it and they will tell me about
it i don't know why people put
themselves through this torture
but uh
you know there were set images and set
principles and set
texts that were said
which then everyone's trying to make
sense oh but that doesn't quite fit in
my life this doesn't quite fit in my
life
blah blah blah and then all the media
talking about every day
i was like that was just absurd
rather than why don't you just talk to
your neighbor and the people that you
know and work out
some basic like principles of what's
going to work
i don't know it seemed to be so abstract
it was really weird
yeah thank you avi but
do you mean that um
like um i i wonder how how you put this
observation let's say in the context of
what we just discussed so this it's uh
where you see let's say the production
of subjects so as the state by um giving
the policy of staying at home and
in a way created a new type of subject
the covet subject or i don't know how we
can call it
or uh
you you mean hear something else and
rather that
the let's say subjects produced by
different forms of
machineries implied in the past then do
not fit to a new form of subjectivity
uh i probably wasn't saying something
that clever now i don't know
thank you very much max
bye
i guess i was just trying to
point out this idea of
of uh
what seemed to come through in tom's
uh sorry i got a name wrong earlier
tom's uh comments on
harren and and
their mentioning of bart
which was how the image was being used
and i was just broadly interpreting
image being
video
projection you know
announcement or whatever which is a form
of image
[Music]
in this
kind of
absurdly mythological way
but
i don't fully understand what the harem
point was because i haven't understood
it so
you don't need to understand that first
yeah
if i could
i mean i
wouldn't have an answer
to it because i mean i would i mean it's
towards the end of my presentation i
would i in a way suggested that or
insinuated that
the way uh putin is using his own image
uh and his own speech
as uh as um as a as a kind of operation
and therefore an operational image
that that might be
i mean
a similar a similar interpretation might
be might be applied to
johnson's uh appearances uh during uh
not only during the covet uh time but uh
but almost at every stage of his
uh
uh of his life as a politician in in uh
in in this in this with his kind of
public attention he has that he's kind
of com constantly trying to
to make operative his own body his own
voice his own his his his craziness and
his uh and his
uh and his um evilness in a way uh to to
make it uh to make it in uh
i mean
to to turn and turn it into the most
efficient and effective political
machinery
thinkable uh by using means that are not
necessarily
associated with efficiency and uh and
politics even and so this is this and a
similar thing is
kind of right now happening with uh
with all these kind of new um kind of
illiberal autocratic leaders who
who who kind of constantly manipulate
their own image
to make it even more operative and
efficient and this is of course a
completely different take on the
operational image uh
than than and haroon tried it with
regard to these kind of
machinic images who images who only kind
of uh speak to themselves in a way or
speak to the machines in which they are
implemented or integrated
and therefore don't need any any
um
any human
viewer anymore but in a similar way i
mean
johnson and putin don't need these human
viewers to a certain extent they don't
need them neither because they are
they're what
what they need up i mean
uh in a way uh reactions that that that
can be counted by
uh
uh by
kind of quantified uh with algorithmic
means and uh by by way of uh online
social media and it's so so this is this
is where the efficiency actually
uh
arrives that and or was being was being
registered um and um otherwise i mean of
course it's also
it's also highly effective and
politics and the politics based on
threat and uh on and on kind of
fear-mongering etc of course but it's
also very much it's almost directly uh
channeled into those kind of uh
in
onto these platforms where these where
these responses these reactions can be
counted calculated and
therefore becoming even more manipulable
than they have been
than if you would just be in the
presence of a human
that is frightened
what by by what you are saying or by how
you're acting sorry that was a bit long
but it's uh
i think that's very interesting that
indeed uh those pictures are created
already while taking into account other
machineries and other technologies that
would
work with them yeah
they already implied in or integrated
into
uh into
assemblages into kind of the techno
cognitive assemblages and um and these
um and and and therefore they're they
they can i mean they're there
their efficiency can be calibrated that
way
yeah it's also probably because putin
and
uh whatever else
ruling
uh guys they're like
we're kind of trying to interpret them
because they are power they're like
drunken father coming home which else
they're gonna say
you know
call it stop call it start war started
something else everybody go to you know
to some place where you will become
soldiers
so that's exactly the same type of yeah
commands
we're trying to find out what is for us
there
that's why english people i think was
watching them have you been watching uh
johnson
have you
did you watch this news
i mean
no i mean
that's not my interest in life
i'm not begrudging anyone else i'm just
saying
i think this is the whole irony that
while we also we analyzed those pictures
we don't actually watch this
so we we analyze the more separate
pieces that then
also operate as quotes because then they
are multiplied and
reposted in different media
i do i do watch listen to the people
that watch and listen to them
for an anthropologist it's perfect
well
should we conclude
yeah
well i think it was really a great a
very
very interesting and intense um
discussion
uh i don't know yet what will be the
topic of our next session probably will
will continue with the problem of labor
but uh
what other concepts we will
probably think a little bit more further
after this assembly
and so thank you all for being here for
joining uh for making presentations um
tom and max who left and uh yeah
let's stay in touch
have a nice evening
thank you zineda thank you